One of the most challenging issues in India's mining sector is the lack of assessment of India's natural resources.[27] A number of areas remain unexplored and the mineral resources in these areas are yet to be assessed.[27] The distribution of minerals in the areas known is uneven and varies drastically from one region to another.[16] India is also looking to follow the example set by England, Japan and Italy to recycle and use scrap iron for the ferrous industry.[40]

The first National Mineral Policy was enunciated by the Government in 1993 for liberalization of the mining sector. The National Mineral Policy, 1993 aimed at encouraging the flow of private investment and introduction of state-of-the-art technology in exploration and mining. In the Mid-Term Appraisal of the Tenth Five-Year Plan, it was observed that the main factors responsible for lack of success of the Policy were procedural delays in the processing of applications for mineral concessions and the absence of adequate infrastructure in the mining areas. To go into the whole gamut of issues relating to the development of the mineral sector and suggest measures for improving the investment climate the Mid-Term Appraisal had proposed the establishment of a High Level Committee. Accordingly, the Government of India, Planning Commission, constituted a Committee on 14 September 2005. under the Chairmanship of Shri Anwarul Hoda, Member, Planning Commission. The committee made detailed recommendations on all of its terms of Reference in December 2006. Based on the recommendations of the High Level Committee, in consultation with State Governments, the Government replaced the National Mineral Policy, 1993 with a new National Mineral Policy on 13 March 2008.

Under the British Raj a committee of experts formed in 1894 formulated regulations for mining safety and ensured regulated mining in India.[18] The committee also passed the 1st Mines act of 1901 which led to a substantial drop in mining-related accidents.[18] The accidents in mining are caused both by man-made and natural phenomenon, for example, explosions and flooding.[41] The main causes for incidents resulting in serious injury or death are roof fall, methane gas explosion, coal dust explosion, carbon monoxide poisoning, vehicular accidents, falling/slipping and hauling related incidents.

Sand mining is a practice that is becoming an environmental issue in India. Environmentalists have raised public awareness of illegal sand mining in the states of Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh,[48] Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu[49] and Goa of India.[50] Conservation and environmental NGO Awaaz Foundation filed a public interest litigation in the Bombay High Court seeking a ban on mining activities along the Konkan coast.[51] Awaaz Foundation, in partnership with the Bombay Natural History Society also presented the issue of sand mining as a major international threat to coastal biodiversity at the Conference of Parties 11, Convention on Biological Diversity, Hyderabad in October 2012.[52][53] D. K. Ravi, an Indian Administrative Service officer of the Karnataka state, who was well known for his tough crackdown on the rampant illegal sand mining in the Kolar district, was found dead at his residence in Bengaluru, on 16 March 2015. It is widely alleged that the death is not due to suicide but the handiwork of the mafia involved in land grabbing and sand mining.[54

Mining plays an important role in Indian industry, which contributes about 3% of the GDP in 1990s, and about 2% of the GDP now.[55] Goa, a state of India, has 1000 million tonnes of iron ore reserves and thereby has a strong mining industry. It exports about 30 million tonnes of iron ore annually.[56] In the early 21 century, the demand of iron ore from China increased in a dramatic speed, accordingly, the export of iron ore from Goa increased. Meanwhile, Indian government loosened the regulation on iron ore trading. These aspects, along with other factors like spot contract, resulted in the doubled export of iron ore between 2005 and 2010.

In order to maintain the sustainability of mining, the Indian government set up a series of regulations included in Act of Parliament in 1987. According to Act of Parliament, mining companies had to obtain the lease for 20 years in maximum from the Indian Government, otherwise, their mining behaviors were not allowed
